README.md, before:

# Mountain ⛰️ - HTTP/2-ready server and client

This library is written and designed as set of ES modules.

**HTTP/2** was introduced in NodeJS **8.4.0**.

In order to use this library, you must install Node **13.4.0** and above. Or NodeJS from **10** up to **13.4.0** version and provide _--experimental-modules_ flag.

```typescript
import { Server } from '@prostory/mountain'
```

It is wrapper under _HTTP/2_ module of `NodeJS`.

**HTTP/2** (originally named HTTP/2.0) is a major revision of the HTTP network protocol used by the World Wide Web. It was derived from the earlier experimental SPDY protocol, originally developed by Google. _HTTP/2_ was developed by the Hypertext Transfer Protocol working group _httpbis_ (where bis means "second") of the Internet Engineering Task Force. The _HTTP/2_ specification was published as RFC 7540 in May 2015.

The standardization effort was supported by Chrome, Opera, Firefox, Internet Explorer 11, Safari, Amazon Silk, and Edge browsers. Most major browsers had added _HTTP/2_ support by the end of 2015. And NodeJS did.

## API

### Server

As browsers support only encrypted _HTTP/2_ connection and this is desirable for all clients, so only secure server can be created. For this you must provide key and certificate.

```typescript
import { Server } from '@prostory/mountain'

const server = new Server({
  key: 'path/to/key.pem',
  cert: 'path/to/cert.pem',
  timeout: 1000, // optional: defines timeout that server will wait before ending connection.
})
```

From **0.3.0** `Server` supports cluster mode and can starts multiple servers as workers - for each machine core. By default `Server` starts only in one core (one thread), but it can be changed by `parallel: boolean` parameter added to `Server`'s options object.

```typescript
import { Server } from '@prostory/mountain'

const server = new Server({
  key: 'path/to/key.pem',
  cert: 'path/to/cert.pem',
  parallel: true
})
```

Enabling this option starts `CPU cores - 1` server threads (one for master process) by default. You can change it by providing `threads: number` to `Server`'s options object.

```typescript
import { Server } from '@prostory/mountain'

const server = new Server({
  key: 'path/to/key.pem',
  cert: 'path/to/cert.pem',
  parallel: true,
  threads: 3
})
```

> If, by example, your machine has 4 cores and you set `threads: 5`, then this parameter will be corrected to `4 cores - 1 = 3`. So, `Server`'s threads has upper limit: `CPU cores - 1` rule. This is done for avoiding overloading threads.

Methods of the instance of _Server_ class:

- `onRequest`:

  ```typescript
  // onRequest is the main method.
  server.onRequest((request: Http2Request, response: Http2Response) => {
    const path = request.headers[':path']
    // some other code here
  })
  ```

  > Type **Http2Request** contains `headers` object, `stream`, `flags` and `rawHeaders`.

  Usually you will not need `stream`, `flags` and `rawHeaders` properties.

  > Type **Http2Response** contains `send` and `sendError` methods.

  - `sendError` sends error object to the client:

    ```typescript
    server.onRequest((request: Http2Request, response: Http2Response) => {
      const { sendError } = response

      sendError({
        status: 500,
        reason: 'Some meaningful reason', // optional
        error: new Error('Some error'), // optional: raw Error object.
      })
    })
    ```

  - `send` send data to client:
    Method accept object that must have **type** property that may have one of three
    values - `'data' | 'file' | 'headers'`.

    If **type** is `headers`, then you must provide second property _headers_:

    ```typescript
    server.onRequest((request: Http2Request, response: Http2Response) => {
      const { send } = response

      send({
        type: 'headers',
        headers: {
          ':status': 200,
        },
      })
    })
    ```

    If **type** is `data`, then you must provide second property _data_:

    ```typescript
    server.onRequest((request: Http2Request, response: Http2Response) => {
        const { send } = response

        send({
          type: 'data',
          data: /* object, string or array of octets */
          }
        })
      })
    ```

    If **type** is `file`, then you must provide second property _data_, that is path to file.

    ```typescript
    server.onRequest((request: Http2Request, response: Http2Response) => {
      const { send } = response

      send({
        type: 'file',
        data: '/index.html',
      })
    })
    ```

- `onSessionCreated`:

  Listens to new sessions establishes.

  ```typescript
  server.onSessionCreated((session: ServerHttp2Session) => {
    // Do some useful work
  })
  ```

- `onTimeout`:

  Listens on _timeout_ event if there is no activity on the **Http2Session** after the configured number of milliseconds.

  ```typescript
  server.onTimeout(() => {
    // Do some useful work
  })
  ```

- `onUnknownProtocol`:

  Listens on _unknownProtocol_ event that is emitted when a connecting client fails to negotiate an allowed
  protocol (i.e. HTTP/2 or HTTP/1.1).

  ```typescript
  server.onUnknownProtocol((socket: Socket) => {
    // Do some useful work
  })
  ```

- `onError`:

  Listens on errors that has been arisen in current session.

  ```typescript
  server.onError((error: Error) => {
    // Do some useful work
  })
  ```

- `listen`:

  Start listening for requests.

  ```typescript
    server.listen(
      port: number, host: ?string = 'localhost', listener?: () => void
    )
  ```

- `close`:

  Stops the server from establishing new sessions. This does not prevent new
  request streams from being created due to the persistent nature of HTTP/2
  sessions.

  If `callback` is provided, it is not invoked until all active sessions have
  been closed, although the server has already stopped allowing new
  sessions. See [tls.Server.close()](https://nodejs.org/dist/latest-v12.x/docs/api/tls.html#tls_server_close_callback) for more details.

  ```typescript
    server.close(callback?: () => void)
  ```

### Route

You can handle all requests in one function that passed to `onRequest` method or split it by **:path** and **:method**.

In order to create handler for specific path and method, create plain object of `Route` type with
needed properties:

```typescript
const route = {
  path: string | RegExp,
  method: string,
  notFound?: boolean,
  handle: (request: Http2Request, response: Http2Response) => void,
}
```

_notFound_ must be provided only in **ONE!** route. It will be used if request can't be handled by the server.
If route with this property is absent, 404 error will be sent to client.

_handle_ method contains code that handle specific request and sends response (`response.send` or `response.sendError`).

### Router

If you will have many `Route`s, then you may want union them to one representation.
This is why `Router` come. Instance of this class will contains routes and when request is received, it will search for proper `Route` and executes `Route`s `handle` method.

```typescript
const route = {
  path: '/',
  method: 'get',
  handle(request, response) {
    // Some logic
  },
}

const route2 = {
  path: '/about',
  method: 'get',
  handle(request, response) {
    // Some logic
  },
}

server.onRequest(new Router([route, route2]).set())
```

It has `set` method that return function that need to be placed to `server.onRequest` method.

### Client

**Experimental**.

If you build app on _NodeJS_, you may need send requests to server and receive responses (some data).
This is what `Client` for.

```typescript
const client = new Client({
  url: string,
  maxSessionMemory?: number,
  settings?: Http2Settings, // { enablePush?: boolean }
})
```

- _url_ parameter is necessary to establish connection with server. The remote HTTP/2 server to connect to. This must be in the form of a minimal, valid URL with the http:// or https:// prefix, host name, and IP port (if a non-default port is used). Userinfo (user ID and password), path, querystring, and fragment details in the URL will be ignored.
- _maxSessionMemory_ - Sets the maximum memory that the Http2Session is permitted to use. The value is expressed in terms of number of megabytes, e.g. 1 equal 1 megabyte. The minimum value allowed is 1. This is a credit based limit, existing Http2Streams may cause this limit to be exceeded, but new Http2Stream instances will be rejected while this limit is exceeded. The current number of Http2Stream sessions, the current memory use of the header compression tables, current data queued to be sent, and unacknowledged PING and SETTINGS frames are all counted towards the current limit. Default: **10**
- _settings_ - The initial settings to send to the remote peer upon connection.

For sending request use `request` method of `Client` instance.

It accepts _headers: Http2Headers_ headers of request.
And second parameter is `RequestOptions`. It is object with following properties:

- `onResponse?: (headers: Http2Headers) => void` - invokes on server response with response headers.
- `onData?: (chunk: Buffer) => void` - invokes on when server start send payload.
- `onEnd?: () => void` - invokes when response ends.
- `endStream?: boolean` - `true` if the Http2Stream writable side should be closed initially, such as when sending a GET request that should not expect a payload body.
- `exclusive?: boolean` - When true and parent identifies a parent Stream, the created stream is made the sole direct dependency of the parent, with all other existing dependents made a dependent of the newly created stream. Default: `false`.
- `parent?: number` - Specifies the numeric identifier of a stream the newly created stream is dependent on.
- `weight?: number` - Specifies the relative dependency of a stream in relation to other streams with the same parent. The value is a number between **1** and **256** (inclusive).
- `waitForTrailers?: boolean` - When `true`, the `Http2Stream` will emit the `wantTrailers` event after the final DATA frame has been sent.

```typescript
const client = new Client({ url: 'https://localhost:8080' })
client.request(
  {
    ':path': '/',
  },
  {
    onResponse(headers) {
      // Some logic here
    },
  }
)
```

It is licensed under [MIT-style license](LICENSE).

With ❤️ to Mountain

Commit message:

- Rename `Router.set` method to `Router.deliver`. - Rewrite internal behavior of `Router`.

README.md, after:

# Mountain ⛰️ - HTTP/2-ready server and client

This library is written and designed as set of ES modules.

**HTTP/2** was introduced in NodeJS **8.4.0**.

In order to use this library, you must install Node **13.4.0** and above. Or NodeJS from **10** up to **13.4.0** version and provide _--experimental-modules_ flag.

```typescript
import { Server } from '@prostory/mountain'
```

It is wrapper under _HTTP/2_ module of `NodeJS`.

**HTTP/2** (originally named HTTP/2.0) is a major revision of the HTTP network protocol used by the World Wide Web. It was derived from the earlier experimental SPDY protocol, originally developed by Google. _HTTP/2_ was developed by the Hypertext Transfer Protocol working group _httpbis_ (where bis means "second") of the Internet Engineering Task Force. The _HTTP/2_ specification was published as RFC 7540 in May 2015.

The standardization effort was supported by Chrome, Opera, Firefox, Internet Explorer 11, Safari, Amazon Silk, and Edge browsers. Most major browsers had added _HTTP/2_ support by the end of 2015. And NodeJS did.

## API

### Server

As browsers support only encrypted _HTTP/2_ connection and this is desirable for all clients, so only secure server can be created. For this you must provide key and certificate.

```typescript
import { Server } from '@prostory/mountain'

const server = new Server({
  key: 'path/to/key.pem',
  cert: 'path/to/cert.pem',
  timeout: 1000, // optional: defines timeout that server will wait before ending connection.
})
```

From **0.3.0** `Server` supports cluster mode and can starts multiple servers as workers - for each machine core. By default `Server` starts only in one core (one thread), but it can be changed by `parallel: boolean` parameter added to `Server`'s options object.

```typescript
import { Server } from '@prostory/mountain'

const server = new Server({
  key: 'path/to/key.pem',
  cert: 'path/to/cert.pem',
  parallel: true
})
```

Enabling this option starts `CPU cores - 1` server threads (one for master process) by default. You can change it by providing `threads: number` to `Server`'s options object.

```typescript
import { Server } from '@prostory/mountain'

const server = new Server({
  key: 'path/to/key.pem',
  cert: 'path/to/cert.pem',
  parallel: true,
  threads: 3
})
```

> If, by example, your machine has 4 cores and you set `threads: 5`, then this parameter will be corrected to `4 cores - 1 = 3`. So, `Server`'s threads has upper limit: `CPU cores - 1` rule. This is done for avoiding overloading threads.

Methods of the instance of _Server_ class:

- `onRequest`:

  ```typescript
  // onRequest is the main method.
  server.onRequest((request: Http2Request, response: Http2Response) => {
    const path = request.headers[':path']
    // some other code here
  })
  ```

  > Type **Http2Request** contains `headers` object, `stream`, `flags` and `rawHeaders`.

  Usually you will not need `stream`, `flags` and `rawHeaders` properties.

  > Type **Http2Response** contains `send` and `sendError` methods.

  - `sendError` sends error object to the client:

    ```typescript
    server.onRequest((request: Http2Request, response: Http2Response) => {
      const { sendError } = response

      sendError({
        status: 500,
        reason: 'Some meaningful reason', // optional
        error: new Error('Some error'), // optional: raw Error object.
      })
    })
    ```

  - `send` send data to client:
    Method accept object that must have **type** property that may have one of three
    values - `'data' | 'file' | 'headers'`.

    If **type** is `headers`, then you must provide second property _headers_:

    ```typescript
    server.onRequest((request: Http2Request, response: Http2Response) => {
      const { send } = response

      send({
        type: 'headers',
        headers: {
          ':status': 200,
        },
      })
    })
    ```

    If **type** is `data`, then you must provide second property _data_:

    ```typescript
    server.onRequest((request: Http2Request, response: Http2Response) => {
        const { send } = response

        send({
          type: 'data',
          data: /* object, string or array of octets */
          }
        })
      })
    ```

    If **type** is `file`, then you must provide second property _data_, that is path to file.

    ```typescript
    server.onRequest((request: Http2Request, response: Http2Response) => {
      const { send } = response

      send({
        type: 'file',
        data: '/index.html',
      })
    })
    ```

- `onSessionCreated`:

  Listens to new sessions establishes.

  ```typescript
  server.onSessionCreated((session: ServerHttp2Session) => {
    // Do some useful work
  })
  ```

- `onTimeout`:

  Listens on _timeout_ event if there is no activity on the **Http2Session** after the configured number of milliseconds.

  ```typescript
  server.onTimeout(() => {
    // Do some useful work
  })
  ```

- `onUnknownProtocol`:

  Listens on _unknownProtocol_ event that is emitted when a connecting client fails to negotiate an allowed
  protocol (i.e. HTTP/2 or HTTP/1.1).

  ```typescript
  server.onUnknownProtocol((socket: Socket) => {
    // Do some useful work
  })
  ```

- `onError`:

  Listens on errors that has been arisen in current session.

  ```typescript
  server.onError((error: Error) => {
    // Do some useful work
  })
  ```

- `listen`:

  Start listening for requests.

  ```typescript
    server.listen(
      port: number, host: ?string = 'localhost', listener?: () => void
    )
  ```

- `close`:

  Stops the server from establishing new sessions. This does not prevent new
  request streams from being created due to the persistent nature of HTTP/2
  sessions.

  If `callback` is provided, it is not invoked until all active sessions have
  been closed, although the server has already stopped allowing new
  sessions. See [tls.Server.close()](https://nodejs.org/dist/latest-v12.x/docs/api/tls.html#tls_server_close_callback) for more details.

  ```typescript
    server.close(callback?: () => void)
  ```

  Execute this methods only after `Server.listen`. Otherwiser an error will be thrown (server will not be initialized yet). 

### Route

You can handle all requests in one function that passed to `onRequest` method or split it by **:path** and **:method**.

In order to create handler for specific path and method, create plain object of `Route` type with
needed properties:

```typescript
const route = {
  path: string | RegExp,
  method: string,
  notFound?: boolean,
  handle: (request: Http2Request, response: Http2Response) => void,
}
```

_notFound_ must be provided only in **ONE!** route. It will be used if request can't be handled by the server.
If route with this property is absent, 404 error will be sent to client.

_handle_ method contains code that handle specific request and sends response (`response.send` or `response.sendError`).

### Router

If you will have many `Route`s, then you may want union them to one representation.
This is why `Router` come. Instance of this class will contains routes and when request is received, it will search for proper `Route` and executes `Route`s `handle` method.

```typescript
const route = {
  path: '/',
  method: 'get',
  handle(request, response) {
    // Some logic
  },
}

const route2 = {
  path: '/about',
  method: 'get',
  handle(request, response) {
    // Some logic
  },
}

server.onRequest(new Router([route, route2]).deliver())
```

It has `deliver` method that return function that need to be placed to `server.onRequest` method.

### Client

**Experimental**.

If you build app on _NodeJS_, you may need send requests to server and receive responses (some data).
This is what `Client` for.

```typescript
const client = new Client({
  url: string,
  maxSessionMemory?: number,
  settings?: Http2Settings, // { enablePush?: boolean }
})
```

- _url_ parameter is necessary to establish connection with server. The remote HTTP/2 server to connect to. This must be in the form of a minimal, valid URL with the http:// or https:// prefix, host name, and IP port (if a non-default port is used). Userinfo (user ID and password), path, querystring, and fragment details in the URL will be ignored.
- _maxSessionMemory_ - Sets the maximum memory that the Http2Session is permitted to use. The value is expressed in terms of number of megabytes, e.g. 1 equal 1 megabyte. The minimum value allowed is 1. This is a credit based limit, existing Http2Streams may cause this limit to be exceeded, but new Http2Stream instances will be rejected while this limit is exceeded. The current number of Http2Stream sessions, the current memory use of the header compression tables, current data queued to be sent, and unacknowledged PING and SETTINGS frames are all counted towards the current limit. Default: **10**
- _settings_ - The initial settings to send to the remote peer upon connection.

For sending request use `request` method of `Client` instance.

It accepts _headers: Http2Headers_ headers of request.
And second parameter is `RequestOptions`. It is object with following properties:

- `onResponse?: (headers: Http2Headers) => void` - invokes on server response with response headers.
- `onData?: (chunk: Buffer) => void` - invokes on when server start send payload.
- `onEnd?: () => void` - invokes when response ends.
- `endStream?: boolean` - `true` if the Http2Stream writable side should be closed initially, such as when sending a GET request that should not expect a payload body.
- `exclusive?: boolean` - When true and parent identifies a parent Stream, the created stream is made the sole direct dependency of the parent, with all other existing dependents made a dependent of the newly created stream. Default: `false`.
- `parent?: number` - Specifies the numeric identifier of a stream the newly created stream is dependent on.
- `weight?: number` - Specifies the relative dependency of a stream in relation to other streams with the same parent. The value is a number between **1** and **256** (inclusive).
- `waitForTrailers?: boolean` - When `true`, the `Http2Stream` will emit the `wantTrailers` event after the final DATA frame has been sent.

```typescript
const client = new Client({ url: 'https://localhost:8080' })
client.request(
  {
    ':path': '/',
  },
  {
    onResponse(headers) {
      // Some logic here
    },
  }
)
```

It is licensed under [MIT-style license](LICENSE).

With ❤️ to Mountain
